---
title: Permanent Commission of Women in Army
author: Loveleen Kukreja
date: 2021-12-10
excerpt: Joining the army and serving the country is the dream for every citizen
  of the country
hero: images/permanent-commision-for-women.jpeg
---
Joining the army and serving the country is the dream for every citizen of the country. 

What if I tell you that the crucial fundamental rights like equality of opportunity in public employment are discriminated against women? What if I tell you that equality before the law which is the fundamental right of every citizen is discriminated against women? Do you know that women are discriminated against the public employment in the army for years now? Yes, you read it right. Let’s discover it together now.

In the first instance, women were not allowed to serve in the Indian army according to the Army Act,1950. The first women army officer was employed in 1992 that too only for 5 years and in staff operations which further increased to 10 and 14 years of employment but kept them alienated from the Permanent Commission till 2020.

In 2010, Delhi High Court held that women officers of the Indian airforce and Indian army who opted for the Permanent Commission but were not granted the commission are entitled to all the benefits of the Permanent Commission. Proceedings were initiated for the non-compliance of the order which resulted in the order being stayed by the High Court. [[source](https://www.drishtiias.com/daily-updates/daily-news-analysis/women-eligible-for-permanent-commission)]

February 2021 marks the completion of 12 months in view that women received the proper to be completely commissioned across all ten branches of the Indian Army. However, reachable files suggest that even after the Supreme Court judgment that mandated it, entirely 45% of girl officers were permanently commissioned in contrast to 90% of their male counterparts. This problem quickly tracks the repercussions of the Supreme Court’s judgment on women’s ranks, pension, and possibilities in the Indian Army, within a similar fashion examination of new institutional boundaries they have to overcome to be definitely commissioned.

In the recent scenario, women are entitled and provided with the opportunity to serve the country as a short service commission officer that too only in ten streams of combat support and arms and services. In SSC or Short Service Commission, the officers are granted a commission for 10 years. After 10 years of the commission, if one wishes to continue joining the army, they can opt to serve for four more years. After the completion of four years of commission, men are provided with the opportunity to opt for Permanent commission officer whereas women are not provided with the opportunity to join the permanent commission. Glass ceiling was made by the government for women which was a violation of the fundamental right of equality of opportunity for women [[source](https://www.insightsonindia.com/2021/11/13/permanent-commission-for-women-officers/#:~:text=A%20Permanent%20Commission%20means%20a,choose%20a%20four%2Dyear%20extension)]. After years of discrimination, women realized that it is highly discriminating of the government to not grant the permanent commission to women which also takes off the rights of women regarding pension schemes and other benefits of the Permanent Commission.

### Why was the government against the longstanding permanent commission of women in the army? [[source](https://indianexpress.com/article/explained/women-in-army-what-supreme-court-said-6273177/)]

In the affidavit given by the government, they argued that it is not discriminatory of the exclusion of women because it is inescapable due to the peculiar operational compulsions of the army. The court strongly opposed the argument of the government that it would be a considerable challenge for women officers to complete the menace of service owing to their extended absence during pregnancy, motherhood, and domestic obligation toward their children and families. This argument of the court is viewed as a strong stereotype which assumes that domestic obligations rest solely on women. In the 21st century, this stereotypical behavior of government towards women indicated the 19th-century thinking of them which needs to be given due attention as it will be completely harmful to society to think this way about women.

## The Judgement

After 17 years of battles in the courts, the Supreme court of India in February 2020, ordered that women officers of the Indian Army serving under SSC and have scored 60% in their assessment subject and the competition of medical requirements as per the rules of the army for deployment as on August 1, 2020, and are vigilance and disciplinary clearance, be granted Permanent Commission, retrospectively [[source](https://blog.ipleaders.in/permanent-commission-women-forces/)]. This order gives women officers the opportunity to opt for not only staff appointments but also for the command roles in combat streams. This also prevents the fundamental rights of women from being violated and provides justice to them. Similar cases have been pending before the Supreme Court of India against the discriminating behavior of Indian Naval services and the Indian Armed Forces.

## Violation of the Articles

There was a violation of an order to grant permanent commission to women on the part of the government. Even after qualifying all the requirements, be it 60 % score in assessment subject, medical requirements or vigilance, and disciplinary clearance, women were denied the permanent commission. This violates various fundamental rights of an individual which includes Article 14 that is the Right to equality and equality before the law, Article 15 that is the restriction of discrimination on the basis of gender, caste, color, creed, sex, etc., Article 16 that is equality of opportunity in the public employment, Article 32 that is Right to constitutional Remedies and Article 142 that is enforcement of decrees and orders of the supreme court and unless as to discovery, etc [[source](https://indiankanoon.org/search/?formInput=fundamental%20rights)].

## Problems that occurred due to the discriminating behavior of the government

Women were not allowed for the financial benefit of pension schemes which occurs only after the completion of 20 years of service in the Indian army which was restricted to 14 years for women [[source](https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/supreme-court-indian-army-women-permanent-commission-pc-review-1783418-2021-03-25)]. Medical standards that are evaluated for the grant of Permanent Commission are the same of the 30-year male candidates and 40-year female candidates which the court has said is arbitrary and irrational. The stereotypical thinking of the government towards women that they are entitled to look after domestic works is so backward and needs to be changed to uplift women in society. Other forces like Naval forces, Airforce are still discriminating employment on the basis of gender.

## Conclusion

The absolute prohibition on women to participate in combat is not only highly discriminatory or disproportionate against women but not granting the Permanent commission and keeping them aloft of pensionary benefits after retirement is not justifiable as they also go through the training and also put in all their efforts, labor and serves for the nation [[source](https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/centre-agrees-to-grant-permanent-commission-to-11-women-army-officers/article37454454.ece)]. The case is not about women empowerment or upliftment, this is all about the equality of rights and opportunity to both women and men. The day our country starts to treat everyone with equal rights and not on the basis of gender, that day will be the day of revolution and it will help the country achieve the heights in overall terms.